README for sidtools
===================

What is it?
-----------

sidtools is a collection of small tools to be used with sids, i.e. 
files with music data that have been extracted ("ripped") from C-64
programs.  They can be played on your Unix system by a program called
SidPlay.  sidtools lets you create playlists, manually or
automatically, and play them.  

Home page
---------

http://user.tninet.se/~uxm165t/sidtools.html

Portability notes
-----------------

My personal system is GNU/Linux ix86, and I don't think there should
be a problem compiling on any such system.  I've also compiled
sidtools under HP-UX (with gcc+glibc).  Other compilers and C
libraries could give you errors.  If you have any problems, please
send me an email.  I don't have access to any other OSes than
GNU/Linux, HP-UX, GNU/Hurd and Solaris, so if you successfully compile
sidtools on some other architecture, especially with another compiler
and C library, please write me an email telling me about it.  I've
just started fiddling with automake and autoconf, so if you're
experiencing any problems, I'd really like to hear about them.

Requirements
------------

You'll still need SidPlay and a bunch of sids for this package to be
of any use, of course.

Author
------

sidtools is being developed by Linus Åkerlund <uxm165t@tninet.se>. 

Installation
------------

Please see the file INSTALL for simple installation instructions, and
the texinfo documentation for a more thorough description of the
compilation and installation.

Problems
--------

If you have any problems with sidtools, please tell me about it and
I'll see what I can do about it.  A problem that I've encountered is
that corrupt sids can make makelist behave strangely, which in turn
makes search2list behave strangely, as the database file looks weird.
If search2list doesn't behave as you think it should, have a look at
the database file and see if you can see anything in it that looks
weird.  I've added some checks to makelist, but I can't be sure that
they'll fix all possible errors.
