\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename sidtools.info
@settitle Sidtools Manual
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Miscellaneous
@direntry
* sidtools: (sidtools).         Creating playlists for Sidplay
@end direntry

@ifinfo
This manual describes sidtools, a set of tools to create and play
playlists for SidPlay.

Copyright @copyright{} 1998-2000 Linus @ringaccent{A}kerlund

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, and provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Sidtools Manual
@author Linus @ringaccent{A}kerlund <uxm165t@@tninet.se>
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1998-1999 Linus @ringaccent{A}kerlund

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, and provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node    Top,       What is sidtools, ,         (dir)
@comment node-name, next,          previous, up

Sidtools is a set of utilities for creating playlists for SidPlay, and
also to make SidPlay play them.  It contains four programs: makelist,
which creates a database file out of the sids on your system,
search2list, which lets you search this database file and output
playlists, sidlist, which lets you play these and other playlists and
sidplayo, which is a wrapper for SidPlay.  

This manual documents version 1.0 of sidtools.

@menu
* What is sidtools::         
* Installing sidtools::      
* Using sidtools::           
* Command Reference::        
* Database Format::
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@node   What is sidtools, Installing sidtools, Top, Top
@chapter What is sidtools

sidtools is a bunch of small tools to be used with Sidplay on Linux
systems.  It should work under other Unix systems as well. If it
doesn't, please write an email and tell me about your problems.
@code{sidtools} lets you create a database of your sids, which can be
searched for keywords to create playlists.  You can also create
playlists manually or use a directory as a playlist.  Read the rest of
this document to find out more about the details.

@section What is Sidplay?

@code{sidplay} is a program that lets your Linux/Unix system play sids,
i.e. music files that have been extracted from C-64 programs.  The
Linux/Unix version is command line based, which gives you all the
advantages of running a Unix system, e.g. you can pipe data to it and
from it, which @code{sidtools} utilize.  If you want to know more about
@code{Sidplay}, have a look at
@url{http://www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Lakes/5147/}, the Sidplay
home page.  You can also use other sidplayers, like @code{VICE} (very
experimental) and LittleSID, but I haven't tested that much.

@section What is the HVSC?

@code{HVSC}, the High Voltage SID Collection, is a huge collection of
sids.  Version 3.7 contains more than 12000 sid files, many of which
contain more than one subtune.  If you're interested in listening to
C-64 music, you should have a look at 
@url{http://www.hvsc.c64.org/}.

@section Why use sidtools?

If you, like me, dislike graphical user interfaces, you probably don't
want to use any of the GUI frontends for @code{Sidplay}.  @code{sidlist}
lets you create playlists, so that you don't have to issue a command
each time you want to change the sid you're listening too.  This can be
very convenient if you want to listen to sids while working on something
else.  All you have to do is create a playlist (which @code{search2list}
can do automatically for you, if you don't want to create your own
playlists manually) and launch @code{sidlist}.  While writing this, I'm
listening to an automatically created playlist with all the songs from
HVSC that have the copyright year 1983.  Nice, huh?  @code{sidlist} can
also play random tunes.

@node   Installing sidtools, Using sidtools, What is sidtools, Top
@chapter Installing sidtools

@section Getting sidtools

You can find the latest version of @code{sidtools} at
@url{http://user.tninet.se/~uxm165t/sidtools.html}

@section Installing sidtools

Move the downloaded archive (@file{sidtools-VERSION.tar.gz}) to where
you usually put your source code archives (e.g. @file{/usr/local/src/})
and unpack it with:

@example
tar -xzvf sidtools-VERSION.tar.gz
@end example

@noindent
This creates the directory @file{sidtools-VERSION}.  Move into that
directory and configure it for your system.

Just follow these simple steps and everything should work out nicely:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Type @code{./configure}.  This will configure @code{sidtools} for your
system. 
@item
Now type @code{make}.  This will compile and link the C
programs.  
@item
To install the programs and the documentation, type @kbd{make
install}.  
@item
If you don't like @code{sidtools}, type @code{make uninstall} to
uninstall it, and send me an email and tell me why you don't like it.
My email address is @email{uxm165t@@tninet.se}.
@end itemize

@node   Using sidtools, Command Reference, Installing sidtools, Top
@chapter Using sidtools

@section makelist

@code{makelist} is a program you'll only need to use once (until you
upgrade your sid collection), so we might as well do that at once.  What
it does is that it goes through your sid collection and creates a
database by extracting some information from the sids themselves (name
of the author, title of song and copyright) and add the path to the
song.  On my system the sids live in the directory
@file{/usr/local/games/C64Music}, so I'd type

@example
makelist /usr/local/games/C64Music -o DB_NAME
@end example

@noindent
@var{DB_NAME} is the name of the database file.  @code{makelist} will
tell you which directories it's working on, and it'll probably take a
few minutes for it to finish.  If you just type

@example
makelist PATH_TO_SIDS PATH_TO_MORE_SIDS
@end example

@noindent
the database will by default be written to the file specified in the
configuration file.  If there is no configuration file, it will instead
be written to a file in your home directory called @code{.sidtoolsdb}.
And as the example shows, you can also specify more than one directory
where you keep your sids.  This can be handy if you don't have all your
sids under one directory.  Of course, you could then tell makelist to
search from the root directory, but that would probably take lots of
extra time, so this is a much better solution if you, like me, have the
HVSC installed somewhere under /usr and then have some other sids in
your home directory.

@code{makelist} will also write a file in your home directory called
@code{.sidtoolsrc}, which is the configuration file for sidtools.  This
file has the following fields:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{SIDDB}: This is the path to the sid database which @code{makelist}
creates.
@item
@code{HVSC_BASE}: The root directory of the High Voltage Sid Collection
(or, if you don't have it, the root directory to your SID collection,
whatever it might be).
@item
@code{SIDPLAY}: The name of the binary that you use to play SIDs,
e.g. @code{sidplay}.
@item
@code{SIDPLAY_ARGS}: The arguments you want to pass to the sidplayer by
default.
@end itemize

So in the example above, @code{PATH_TO_SIDS} should be the root
directory of your HVSC installation.

The option @code{-n} (or @code{--no-rc}) makes @code{makelist} not write
the rc file (~/.sidtoolsrc).  This can be useful if you want to keep
more than one database.

A good idea, if you get new sids on a regular basis (e.g. if you rip
them yourselves), is to let a cron job run @code{makelist} every day.  

So, now that you have a database, you might as well start using it!

@section search2list

@code{search2list} uses the database you've just created to create
playlists for you.  What you do is that you provide it with search
strings, that will be searched for in the author, title, copyright,
number of songs, default start song, load address, init address, play
address and/or file size fields. In the author, title and copyright
fields you can use regular expressions as keywords, for more flexible
searches. 

When given the @code{--extra-information} or @code{-e} argument
@code{search2list} gives you all the information from the sid header,
like title, author, copyright, init and play addresses etc. You can also
use the @code{--stil-information} or @code{-z} option to get STIL info
about the tune.  This output can't be used as a playlist.

Here's an example to get you started:

@example
search2list --author=hubbard --title=commando
@end example

@noindent
This search specifies that the string @kbd{hubbard} should be in
the author field and that the string @kbd{commando} should be in
the title field.  This just gives me one hit, Rob Hubbard's Commando
tune (of course).  The path of the sids found will be printed to the
screen, which isn't a problem.  If you want to capture those in a file
(which can be used as a playlist), just type something like

@example
search2list --copyright=1982 > 1982-sids
@end example

@noindent
This will search the copyright fields for the string @kbd{1982},
which will of course return all the sids that were copyrighted in
1982, @emph{and} it will put the paths to these sids in the file
@file{1982-sids}, which can now be used as a playlist.  If you want
to tell @code{search2list} which database file to use explicitly,
you can do that too on the command line:

@example
search2list --database=my_database -a hubbard -c 1985 > hubbard-85-sids
@end example

@noindent
This will search the database @file{my_database} for all the sids
that @kbd{hubbard} composed and that were copyrighted in 1985,
and put them in the file @file{hubbard-85-sids}.  This example also
illustrates the short Unix-style versions of the option, where @code{-a}
does the same thing as @code{--author} and @code{-c} does the same thing
as @code{--copyright}. 

@example
search2list --author=hubbard --start-tune=2 >hubbard-start-2
@end example

@noindent
This is just an example of the more unusual search options.  The
@code{--start-tune=2} argument searches for sid files where the default
start song is number 2.  The other more exotic options are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
--number-of-tunes=NUMBER searches for the specified number of songs
@item
--number-of-tunes=">NUMBER" searches for sids with at least this number
of subtunes
@item
--number-of-tunes="<NUMBER" searches for sids with at most this number of
subtunes
@item
--load-address=HEX_NUMBER searches for the specified load address
@item
--load-address="<HEX_NUMBER" searches for the sids with at least the
specified load address
@item
--load-address=">HEX_NUMBER" searches for sids with at most the
specified load address 
@item
--init-address=HEX_NUMBER searches for the specified init address
@item
--init-address="<HEX_NUMBER" searches for sids with at least the
specified init address 
@item
--init-address=">HEX_NUMBER" searches for sids with at most the
specified init address 
@item
--play-address=HEX_NUMBER searches for the specified play address
@item
--play-address="<HEX_NUMBER" searches for sids with at least the
specified play address 
@item
--play-address=">HEX_NUMBER" searches for sids with at most the
specified play address 
@item
--file-size=NUMBER searches for the specified file size
@item
--file-size=">NUMBER" searches for sids with this minimum file size
@item
--file-size="<NUMBER" searches for sids with this maximum file size
@end itemize

@noindent
@code{search2list} doesn't output its playlists sorted in alphabetical
order (but rather in the internal order of the file system).  If you
want the output to be sorted, just pipe the list through the command
sort, like this:
@example
search2list -a "jeroen tel|orcan" --file-size="<5000" | sort 
@end example

@noindent
This will find all sids, composed by Jeroen Tel or Orcan that are at
most 5000 bytes long and display them in alphabetical order.  Of course
only the path names will be sorted, so they will primarily be sorted by
directory, and secondarily by file name.  If you absolutely want to have
the songs sorted by title, you should have a look at commands like cut,
awk, sed etc.

Here's another example of using regular expressions:

@example
search2list --author="hubbard|jeroen tel" --copyright="1984|1988"
@end example

@noindent
This will give you the songs composed by Rob Hubbard or Jeroen Tel,
copyrighted in 1984 or 1986.  The type of regular expressions are the
ones that are provided by the GNU C library.  I won't try to teach you
about regular expressions here, so you'll have to try to find that info
elsewhere, if you want to use them, but don't know anything about them.
I'm no regexp wizard myself, but feel free to ask me if there's anything
you want to know.  NB: all matchings are case insensitive, so you don't
have to do stuff like @code{search2list -a "[Gg]alway"}.

Okay, time to use these playlists for something!

@section sidlist

At last we'll be able to use the playlists.  The easy way to use
@code{sidlist} is to place yourself in the directory where you keep
your playlists (like @file{1982-sids} and @file{hubbard-85-sids} from
the above examples) and type something like

@example
sidlist hubbard-85-sids
@end example

@noindent
This will start playing the sids in the @file{hubbard-85-sids}-list,
printing out the usual @code{sidplay} info about the songs on the
screen as it progresses through the list.  By default @code{sidlist}
keeps playing each song for 3 minutes.  You can of course change this,
by specifying how long you want each sid to be played (in seconds):

@example
sidlist 1982-sids --time=120
@end example

@noindent
This will play all the songs in the @file{1982-sids}-list, playing 2 
minutes (120 seconds) of each sid.

You can always skip to the next sid in the playlist by pressing
@code{ENTER}.  

Of course you can also connect @code{search2list} and @code{sidlist}
with a pipe, so that you don't have to create playlists as files.
Just type something like

@example
search2list -a hörnell | sidlist - --time=300
@end example

@noindent
The @code{-} argument to @code{sidlist} tells it to take its input from
stdin, which in this case is the output from @code{search2list}.  Each
tune will be played for five minutes.  (@emph{WARNING!} Don't try that
exact command line, because it'll play the songs composed by Karl
Hörnell, and, well, they might cause severe mental damage... I take no
responsibility if you try the above command line and go deaf or insane!)

To play random tunes, you can type

@example
sidlist --random
@end example

@noindent
This will make sidlist pick random tunes from the database you created
with @code{makelist} and play them. 

If you don't want to start from the beginning of the list you can
specify which song to start from with the @code{--start-tune} switch.
Example:

@example
sidlist greatest_hits_list --start-tune=10
@end example

@noindent
Here's another example:

@example
search2list -a "jeroen tel" | sidlist - --time=120 --start-tune=10
@end example

@noindent
This will play all songs by Jeroen Tel, except for the first 10, for
two minutes each.

If you want to stop @code{sidlist}, just press @kbd{C-c}.  

With the @code{--delay} argument you can make sidlist take a pause
between tunes.  This can be handy if sidplay isn't killed quickly
enough, so that you get error messages about sidplay not being able to
open the audio device.  You can specify how many seconds you want it to
pause.  The default is 0.

@example
sidlist --random --delay=2
@end example

@noindent
This will play random tunes with 2 seconds of silence between tunes.  I
added the @code{--delay} option because I had problems when using the
OSS sounddrivers (the ones shipped with the Linux kernel), but since I
switched to ALSA (@url{http://www.alsaproject.org}) I don't need this
anymore.

With the @code{--database} (or @code{-b}) option you can specify which
database file you want to use with sidlist (for playing random tunes).
Here's an exampel:

@example
sidlist --random --database=my_database
@end example

This will not use the default database specified in @code{.sidtoolsrc},
but instead use the file @code{my_database}.

If you want to pass a certain set of arguments to the sidplayer
(which is usually Michael Schwendt's SidPlay), use @code{--args}.
Here's an example of a situation where this can be useful:

@example
search2list -a taki | sidlist --args=-ns -
@end example

Here @code{search2list} will find all the tunes by Taki and they will be
piped to @code{sidlist}, which will play them by using an external
sidplayer.  The arguments @code{-ns} will be given to that sidplayer
with every song that is played from the playlist.  If that external
sidplayer is SidPlay, the @code{-ns} argument means that it should
simulate the use of the newer 8580 SID chip, instead of the default 6581
one.  So what the above example does is that it plays the tunes by Taki
with 8580 emulation (which sounds better than the default 6581
emulation). 

All the options, @code{--random, --delay, --time-to-wait, --database,
--args} and @code{--start-tune} can also be written in the old Unix way,
as @code{-r, -d, -t, -b, -a} and @code{-s}.  Here's an example:

@example
sidlist -r -d 2 -s 3 -t 100
@end example

@noindent
You can also use a directory as a playlist.  If I want to listen to
all the songs by Rob Hubbard, I'd type something like

@example
sidlist /usr/local/games/C64Music/Hubbard_Rob
@end example

@noindent
Command line arguments to the sidplayer can also be used in playlists.
Open the playlist with a text editor and add a '@@' after an entry, and
then type in the command line arguments for that song after the '@@'.
An example: let's say you have a list that consists of these two lines:

@example
/usr/X11/games/C64Music/Hubbard_Rob/Action_Biker.sid.gz
/usr/X11/games/C64Music/Yip/Uuno_Turhapuro.sid.gz
@end example

@noindent
If you wanted to listen to the second track of Uuno_Turhapuro, instead
of the first one, which is the default, you'd have to add the argument
'-o2' (if you're using Sidplay), like this:

@example
/usr/X11/games/C64Music/Hubbard_Rob/Action_Biker.sid.gz
/usr/X11/games/C64Music/Yip/Uuno_Turhapuro.sid.gz@@-o2
@end example

@noindent
Simple, isn't it?  You can of course give several arguments on the same
line in this way, for example:

@example
/usr/X11/games/C64Music/Hubbard_Rob/Action_Biker.sid.gz
/usr/X11/games/C64Music/Yip/Uuno_Turhapuro.sid.gz@@-o2 -f44100 -16 -s
@end example

@section sidplayo

@code{sidplayo} can be used just like @code{sidplay}.  It'll
return you to the prompt, though, so that you can do other things at
the same console.  To change sid, you just typ @code{sidplayo}
followed by the name of the sid you wish to listen to.  If you just
want to stop it, just type @code{sidplayo}.

@node   Command Reference, Database Format, Using sidtools, Top
@chapter Command reference

Here's a quick guide to the usage of @code{sidtools}:

@example
makelist <dirs> [-n|--no-rc] [ -o <db_file> ] 
@end example

@noindent
Creates a database file by analyzing the sids in @code{dirs} (as many as
you want) and subdirectories.  If you don't specify a database file, it
will be saved as @code{.sidtoolsdb} in your home directory.  The first
argument will also be written to your @code{.sidtoolsrc} as the root of
your HVSC (High Voltage Sid Collection), and will be used by
@code{search2list}, if you tell it to give you STIL information.
@code{-n} or @code{--no-rc} means that the rc file
(@code{~/.sidtoolsrc}) won't be created/written.

@example
sidplayo [args] [sid_file]
@end example

@noindent
Plays the 'sid_file', and passes the arguments (args) to Sidplay.
Just typing @code{sidplayo} at the shell prompt stops playing the
current sid (or does nothing, if no sid is playing).

@example
sidlist [option] <list | dir | - > 
@end example

@noindent
Plays the tunes in the playlist @code{list} or in the directory
@code{dir} or, if @code{-} is given as argument, the playlist that it
gets from standard input.  The options are:
@itemize @bullet
@item
-h or --help: Shows usage information.
@item
-r or --random: Plays random tunes
@item
-s or --start-tune=NUMBER: Starts playing tune NUMBER from the
playlist. 
@item
-t or --time-to-wait=SECONDS: Plays each tune for SECONDS seconds.
@item
-d or --delay=SECONDS: Waits SECONDS seconds between tunes.
@item
-a or --args=ARGUMENTS: Passes ARGUMENTS to the sidplayer.
@item
-b or --database=DATABASE_FILE: specifies that you want to use
DATABASE_FILE instead of the default database file.
@end itemize

You can always skip to the next tune in the playlist by pressing
@code{ENTER}.  

@example
search2list [-d<db_file>] <options>
@end example

@noindent
Searches the database created by makelist.  You must use at
least one of the following search options:
@itemize @bullet
@item
--author=REGEXP
@item
--title=REGEXP
@item
--copyright=REGEXP
@item
--number-of-tunes=NUMBER
@item
--number-of-tunes=">NUMBER"
@item
--number-of-tunes="<NUMBER"
@item
--start-tune=NUMBER
@item
--start-tune="<NUMBER"
@item
--start-tune=">NUMBER
@item
--load-address=HEX_NUMBER
@item
--load-address="<HEX_NUMBER"
@item
--load-address=">HEX_NUMBER"
@item
--init-address=HEX_NUMBER
@item
--init-address="<HEX_NUMBER"
@item
--init-address=">HEX_NUMBER"
@item
--play-address=HEX_NUMBER
@item
--play-address="<HEX_NUMBER"
@item
--play-address=">HEX_NUMBER"
@item
--file-size=NUMBER
@item
--file-size=">NUMBER"
@item
--file-size="<NUMBER"
@end itemize

@noindent
The argument @code{--extra-information} (or @code{-e}) doesn't give you
a playlist, but all the info about the tunes that match the search
criteria.  The argument @code{--stil-information} (or @code{-z}) also
displays STIL info about the tunes.  

Note: You have to quote the arguments to @code{file-size},
@code{number-of-tunes}, @code{play-address}, @code{init-address},
@code{load-address} and @code{start-tune} if you want to use @code{<} or
@code{>}.  Otherwise, the shell will think you're trying to redirect
stdin or stdout.
Example:
@example
search2list --file-size=">7000"
@end example

@node   Database Format, , Command Reference, Top
@chapter Database Format

The database that is created by @code{makelist} is just a plain text
file.  The format might change in future versions to be identical to
that used in Tomten's Sid Search by Per Bolmstedt
(@email{tomten@@C64.org}), but I'm quite content with it, after the
changes made for version 0.4.5.  Per's database contains both the
information from the sid headers and from the STIL text file.  The
@code{sidtools} database has the same information, but the STIL info is
in another format.

An entry for one tune consists of two lines: one for the info from the
sid header and one for the STIL info.  If there isn't a STIL entry for a
tune, the STIL line in the database is empty.

The sid header lines consists of ten fields, separated by @@ characters.
All the info is taken directly from the headers of the sids themselves.
The fields are:
@itemize @bullet
@item 
Song title.  
@item
Composer. 
@item
Copyright information.  The copyright year and the copyright holder.
@item
Path to the tune.  This will of course vary from system to system,
depending on where the sid collection is in the file system.
@item
Number of songs in the sid file.  
@item
Default song.  This is the number of the song that will be played unless
you explicitly tell @code{sidplay} to play some other song with the
@code{-o} option.
@item
Load address (hexadecimal).  This is the address where the data should
be loaded in the C-64's memory.
@item
Init address (hexadecimal).  This is the address where the initialization
routine is. 
@item
Play address (hexadecimal).  
@item
File size of the sid (in bytes).
@end itemize

The line also ends with a @@ character.

The STIL lines consist of just one field: the whole STIL entry.  The
newline characters (0x0a) have been replaced by '@}', so that the whole
entry can fit on one line.  The carriage return characters (0x0d) have
been replaced by space characters.  When the STIL field is parsed by
@code{search2list}, the '@}' characters are replaced by newlines, so
@code{search2list} prints out the STIL entries exactly as they are
written in STIL.txt.  This is sick and should be changed. :-)

The first line of the database file contains the total number of sids in
the database, which is used for the random routine in @code{sidlist}.

@contents
@bye
